[Music]
hello gonna try a little experiment
today gonna start reading through parts
of the beginning of infinity just the
first chapter I have sent at least one
other Ozzy doing this with a different
series of books I don't know if it'll be
useful I thought I'd try it just as an
experiment sort of thinking out loud I
guess and just commenting on some of my
favorite parts of the book by doing so
it kind of clarifies my own thoughts
about things that's one thing the other
thing that you here's a sense in the
critical rationalist community that
there's a lot of bad ideas out there or
false ideas that get a lot of traction
in an undeserved kind of way
while the ideas of popper and Deutsch
for example don't and so this might go
some way to addressing that yes so in
the case of popper we've got of course
the open society and its enemies and the
fact that people misunderstand what
democracy is about we have the idea on
the ascendancy that Bayesian ISM is true
which I've come in and recently is
essentially inductive ISM in a cheap
tuxedo so we thought we'd dispatched
with inductive ISM we hadn't it's come
back stronger than ever in a sense and
it has real practical problems it means
that science ends up being a quest for
formulae mathematical formulae that in
some sense can statistically describe
certain trends that we have so rather
than being a kind of problem solving
creative exercise people are diverted
into looking for statistical patterns
and this is very useful in some areas
there's no doubt but when all of science
appears to be on board we're thinking
that this is the way in which science
works
it can cause delays it can cause
problems
but I digress I'm here today talked
about talk about the beginning of
infinity and I'm going to start with
chapter 1 the ritual explanations and my
that's thunder upside and my purpose
here is just to read out some of my
favorite parts of each chapter not to
serve as a summary David in fact did
this himself at the conclusion of each
chapter he wrote two forms of summary
one is the meanings of the beginning of
infinity found in this chapter and an
actual summary at the end of it at the
end of each chapter so if you were
looking for the crib notes version of
the beginning of infinity you can simply
read the summaries in at the end of each
chapter it's not a recommended way to
try and understand some of the
subtleties of these ideas but certainly
you can go a long way of understanding
the philosophy by doing that rather than
doing nothing so let me begin part way
through chapter 1 and David says how do
we know one of the most remarkable
things about science is the contrast
between the enormous reach and power of
our best theories and the precarious
local means by which we protect them no
human has ever been to the surface of a
star let alone visited the core where
the transmutation happens and the energy
is produced yet we see those cold dots
in our sky and know that we are looking
at the white-hot surfaces of distant
nuclear furnaces physically that
experience consists of nothing other
than our brains responding to electrical
impulses from our eyes and eyes can
detect only light that is inside them at
the time the fact that the light was
emitted a very far away and long ago and
that much more was happening there than
just the emission of light those are not
things that we see we know them only
from theory scientific theories are
explanations assertions about what is
out there and how it behaves where do
these theories come from for most of the
history of science
it was mistakenly believed that we
derive them from the evidence of our
senses a philosophical doctrine known as
empiricism now he then provides the
beginning infinity provides a diagram
diagram has in in in form it is in the
first box it says sensory experiences
there's an arrow which has labeled
derivation such as extrapolation
generalization or induction and that
leads to a mother box that says theories
knowledge of reality so this is the idea
of empiricism that we go out into the
world we use our senses to read a book
of nature in a sense I'll continue for
example the philosopher John Locke wrote
in 1689 that the mind is like white
paper onto which sensory experience
writes and that that is where all of our
knowledge of the physical world comes
from another empiricist metaphor was the
one could read knowledge from the book
of nature by making observations either
way the discovery of knowledge is its
passive recipient not its creator but in
reality scientific theories are not
derived from ever anything we do not
read them in nature nor does nature
write them in to us they are guesses
bold conjectures human minds create them
by rearranging combining altering and
adding to existing ideas with the
intention of improving upon them we do
not begin with white paper at birth but
with inborn expectations and intentions
and an innate ability to improve upon
them using thought and experience
experience is indeed essential to
science but its role is different from
that supposed by empiricism
it is not the source from which theories
are derived its main use is to choose
between theories that have already been
guessed this is what learning from
experience is however that was not
properly understood until the mid 20th
century with the work of the philosopher
Karl Popper
so historically it was empiricism that
first provided a plausible defense for
experimental science as we now know it
empiricist philosophers criticized and
rejected traditional approaches to
knowledge such as difference to
authority of holy
and other ancient writings as well as
human authorities such as priests and
academics and belief in traditional law
rules of thumb and hearsay empiricism
also contradicted the imposing and
surprisingly persistent idea that the
senses are little more than sources of
error to be ignored and it was
optimistic being all about obtaining new
knowledge in contrast with the medieval
fatalism that it expected everything
important to all to be known already
thus despite being quite wrong about
where scientific knowledge comes from
empiricism was a great step forward in
both the philosophy and history of
science nevertheless the question that
skeptics friendly and unfriendly raised
from the outset always remained how can
knowledge of what has not been
experienced possibly be derived from
what has what sort of thinking could
possibly constitute a valid derivation
of the one from the other no one would
expect to deduce the geography of Mars
from the map of the earth so why should
we expect to be able to learn about
physics on Mars from experiments done on
earth evidently logical deduction alone
would not do because there is a logical
gap no amount of deduction applied to
statements describing a set of
experiences can reach a conclusion about
anything other than those experiences
the conventional wisdom was that the key
is repetition if one repeatedly has
similar experiences under similar
circumstances then one is supposed to
extrapolate or generalize that pattern
and predict that it will continue for
example why don't we expect the Sun to
rise tomorrow morning because in the
past so the argument goes we have seen
it do so whenever we have looked at the
morning sky from this we supposedly
derive the theory that under similar
circumstances we shall always have that
experience although we probably shall on
each occasion when the prediction comes
true and provided that it never fails
the probability that it will always come
true is supposed to increase thus one
supposedly obtains ever more reliable
knowledge of the future from the past
and of the general from the p'tee
Giller that alleged process was called
inductive inference or induction and the
doctrine that scientific theories are
obtained in that way is called inductive
ISM to bridge the logical gap some
inductive us imagine there is a
principle of nature the principle of
inaction that makes inductive inferences
likely to be true the future will
resemble the past is one popular version
of this and one could add that the
distant resembles the near the unseen
resembles the seen and so on but no one
has ever managed to formulate a
principle of induction that is usable in
practice for obtaining theories from
experiences historically criticism of
inductive ism has focused on that
failure and on the logical gap that
cannot be bridged but that lets
inductive ISM off a far too lightly for
it concedes inductive isms to most
serious misconceptions first inductive
ism purports to explain how science
obtains predictions about experiences
but most of our theoretical knowledge
simply does not take that form
scientific theories are about reality
most of which does not consist of
anyone's experiences astrophysics is not
primarily about us what we shall see if
we look at the sky but rather about what
stars are their composition and what
makes them shine and how they are formed
and the universal laws of physics under
which they happened most of that has
never been observed no one has
experienced a billion years or a light
year no one could have been present at
the Big Bang
no one will ever touch a law of physics
except in their minds through theories
all our prediction of how things will
look are deduced from such explanations
of how things are so inductive isn't
files even to address how we can know
about stars and the universe as distinct
from just dots in the sky the second
fundamental misconception in inductive
ISM is that scientific theories predict
that the future will resemble the past
and at the same the unseen resembles the
sane and so on or that it probably will
but in reality the future is unlike the
past the unseen very different from the
same
science often predicts and brings about
phenomena spectacularly different from
anything that has been experienced
before from the linear people dreamed
about flying but they experienced only
falling then they discovered good
explanation explanatory theories about
flying and then they flew in that order
so that that's a part just as an aside
here this is me this is not from the
book that David references in EADS TED
talk one of his TED talks these first
three chapters provide much of the
material for a new a new way to explain
explanation that that TED talk there
I'll continue before 1945 no human being
had ever observed a nuclear fission
atomic bomb explosion they may never
have been one in the history of the
universe yet the first such explosion
and the conditions under which it would
occur had been accurately predicted but
not from the assumption that the future
would be like the past even sunrise that
favorite favorite example of inductive s
is not always observed every 24 hours
when viewed from orbit it may happen
every 90 minutes or not at all and that
was known from theory long before anyone
who ever orbited the earth in fact only
happens 24 hours very rarely and isn't
it and near the equator or a you know
what a media solstice or something like
that if you go to Antarctica or anywhere
inside the the Arctic Circle of the
Antarctic Circle you'll you'll find that
the the Sun is not setting or it's not
rising I'll continue it is no defense of
inductive ISM to point out that in all
these cases the future still does
resemble the past in the sensor database
the same underlying laws of nature for
that is an empty statement any purported
law of nature true or false
about the future and the past is a claim
that they resemble each other by both
conforming to that law so that version
of the principle of induction
could not be used to derive any theory
or prediction from experience or
anything else so this is again a world
class philosopher explaining in detail
why it is that induction cannot possibly
work not only that it isn't actually the
thing that allows scientific theories to
be constructed it's not even a thing
that allows you to construct any kind of
knowledge whatsoever it doesn't exist
induction is irrationality it's a way of
generalizing what is surprising to me is
that professional philosophers seem to
enjoy teaching their students logical
fallacies and I understand logical
fallacies quite well one of these
logical fallacies is the fallacy of
hasty generalization this is the idea
that if you see something a number of
times that you conclude that therefore
it's a general rule this is the kind of
faulty reasoning that leads to things
like racism let's say it's where you
observe a particular behavior amongst a
certain group of people that look the
same and you form the conclusion that
therefore it applies to all people that
look that way it is the assumption that
if you see a bunch of white swans that
you assume that therefore all swans are
white based on a limited number of
observations
but how hasty do you have to be for a
generalization to be hasty well I would
say it's impossible to do an exhaustive
search or to come up with a a regularly
occurring phenomenon such that he does
occurred a sufficient number of times
for you to have any degree of confidence
that it will continue into the future
it's not like observing the same thing
10 times in a row means you are ten
times less confident then if you
observed the thing a hundred times in a
row it doesn't matter if you observe
things every single day forever I hope
for her for a long long time it doesn't
mean that that thing is not going to be
contravened the very next day David
actually goes on to use his example of
up until December 31st 1999 he'd only
ever experienced in front of in the year
he'd only have experienced a 1:9 he'd
never experienced a 2-0 but he's
experienced throughout his life of
seeing a 19 in front of the year's date
and 1991 1992 1993 etc except chapter
1999 he knew that that expectation event
1:9 was about to be refuted on namely on
January 1st 2000 this is always the case
we cannot know especially in science out
there in the physical world that the
phenomena that you've seen repeating
itself isn't part of a much larger more
complex phenomena where at any moment
it's going to reveal itself to be
utterly false
let me go back to the beginning infinity
so David continues later I'm cutting out
a fair bit here
empiricism never did achieve its aim of
liberating science from authority it
denied legitimacy of traditional
authorities and that was salutary but
unfortunately it did this by setting up
two other false authorities sensory
experience and what if a fictitious
process of derivation such as induction
one imagines is used to extract theories
from experience the misconception that
knowledge needs authority to be genuine
or reliable dates back to antiquity and
that still prevails to this day most
courses in the philosophy of knowledge
teach that knowledge is some form of
justified true belief where justified
means designated as true or at least
probable by reference to some
authoritative source or touchstone of
knowledge thus how do we know is
transformed into by what authority do we
claim the latter question is a chimera
that may well have wasted more
philosophers time and effort than any
other ID it converts the quest for truth
into a quest for certainty a feeling or
for endorsement a social status that
this misconception is called
justification ISM the opposing position
namely the recognition that there are no
authoritative sources of knowledge nor
any reliable means of justifying ideas
as being true probable is called
fallibilism to believe is in the
justified truth theory of knowledge have
justified true belief theory of
knowledge this recognition is the
occasion for despair or cynicism because
to them it means that knowledge is
unobtainable but to those of us for whom
creating knowledge means understanding
better what is really there and how it
really behaves and why fallibilism is
part of the very means by which this is
achieved fallibilist suspect even their
best and most fundamental explanations
to contain misconceptions in addition to
truth and so they are predisposed to try
to change them for the better
in contrast the logic of justification
ism is to seek
and typically to believe that one is
found why is it securing ideas against
change
moreover the logic of fallibilism is
though what is moreover the logical
fallibilism is that one not only seeks
to correct the misconceptions of the
past but hopes in the future to find and
change mistaken ideas that no one today
questions or finds problematic so it is
fallibilism not me a rejection of
authority that is essential for the
initiation of unlimited knowledge growth
the beginning of infinity ok so yes this
is a wonderful defense of fallibilism I
think that if there's a philosophy in a
sense that unites many people who follow
the work of David Deutsch it is this
idea of fallibilism I think this is one
of the strongest defenses that we find
anywhere David's spoken about it online
in various places
there's the Nautilus interview I think
there's a wonderful job of that I think
he might have mentioned it in these
closer to truth interviews as well so
this concept that because you can be
wrong and you can be wrong about the
truth that admits the truth is that
omits that there is an objective truth
because you can be wrong about it and so
we take the idea of realism seriously
that there is an objective reality out
there and not all claims to that reality
not all truth claims about that reality
stand on equal footing some of them can
be shown already have shown to be false
some of them haven't yet been shown to
be false but are good explanations and
this idea of fallibilism is that because
it is people who are constructing the
knowledge and people are prone to error
that we can never be sure that we've
found the perfect theory it's always
going to be riddled with errors in ways
we don't know and therefore subject to
improvement whereby if we can make those
improvements we've made progress an
objective progress because we've
corrected some errors and so the new
theory that we have
that doesn't have the errors of the old
theory is objectively better so we're
moving in a particular direction and
this is all underpinned by fallibilism
the simple acknowledgement that for any
claim that is made by human beings or by
people generally we can be wrong about
it there is no Royal Road to truth and
anyone who claims that they have
possession of the absolute final truth I
have to admit that they're human and
even if an infallible source has
provided them with information that is
guaranteed to be true it is them that is
now interpreting it it is them that is
now reporting to you what this truth is
and therefore their their words their
words are fallible their words could be
in error their memory could be an error
a whole bunch of things could be going
wrong even if even if the source from
which they're claiming to have gained
this perfect knowledge was itself
perfect because they're reporting it to
you and they're fallible and fallibilism
is about people it's not about
supernatural entities although we could
apply it there as well if a supernatural
entity tries to claim perfect knowledge
then we are quite entitled to ask by
what means by what means has this
inherent knowledge come and when you
hear it from the inerrant source how do
you know you're hearing it in errantly
okay back to the book David goes on
however rebellion against Authority
cannot by itself be what made the
difference
authorities have been rejected many
times in history and only rarely has any
lasting good come of it
the usual cycle has merely been that new
authorities replace the old what was
needed for the sustained rapid growth of
knowledge was a tradition of criticism
before the Enlightenment that was a very
rare sort of tradition usually the whole
point of a tradition was
keep things the same so let me pause you
there are a number of genuine
discoveries that David Deutsch has made
in philosophy in epistemology in history
that appear in the beginning of infinity
I appear in the fabric of reality as
well some of them but he in the
beginning of infinity we have some truly
groundbreaking wives of attempting to
understand reality humanity knowledge as
a whole
and these ideas how can we say this have
not thus far reached as many people as
they deserve to have reached yet in this
one in particular it's such a useful
starting point for any historian anyone
who's interested in history mmm could
benefit from really trying to get to the
heart of this this this idea of
tradition of criticism this idea in
particular this idea of a tradition of
criticism it is an idea that could
really inform history or the study of
history or a study of sociology perhaps
even a study of psychology to some
extent as well
this idea that criticism is a thing that
allows progress and a tradition of
criticism is something that is an
explanation for the reasons why there
was a stark difference between the year
1000 and the year 2000 whereas the Year
1000 was very much like to use zero and
very much like the 1000 bc which was
very much like the year 10,000 bc for
the majority of human history things
were in stasis things were the same
there wasn't much change going on and
then something remarkable happened and
it's called the Enlightenment and it led
to the Industrial Revolution but what
are the philosophical underpinnings that
caused these massive transformations now
we can talk about our wells science
arrived and there was um this idea of
having science being about testable
ideas and and
and we discovered things like steam
engines very well these are effects of a
deeper philosophical phenomenon and the
philosophical phenomenon is as David
explains here a tradition of criticism
let me continue with the beginning of
infinity
thus the Enlightenment was a revolution
in how people sought knowledge by trying
not to rely on authority that is the
context in which empiricism purporting
to rely solely on the senses
foreknowledge played such a salutary
historical role despite being
fundamentally false and even
authoritative in its conception of how
science works one consequence of this
tradition of criticism was the emergence
of a methodological rule that a
scientific theory must be testable
though this was not made explicit at
first that is to say the theory must
make predictions which if the theory
were false could be contradicted by the
outcome of some possible observation
thus although scientific theories are
not derived from experience that can be
tested by experience by observation or
experiment for example before the
discovery of radioactivity chemists had
believed and had verified in countless
experiments that transmutation is
impossible Rutherford and Soddy boldly
conjectured that uranium spontaneously
transmuted into other elements then by
demonstrating the creation of the
element radium in a steel container of
uranium they refuted the prevailing
theory and science progressed they were
able to do that because that earlier
theory was testable it was possible to
test for the presence of radium in
contrast the ancient theory that all
matter is composed of combination of
elements including earth air fire and
water was untestable
because it did not clued in because it
did not include any way of testing for
the presence of those components so it
can never be refuted by experience
paramount hence it can never be and
never was improved upon through
experiment the Enlightenment was a route
a philosophical change the physicist
Galileo Galilei was perhaps the first to
understand the importance of
experimental tests which he called
cementing
trials by ordeal as to sing from other
forms of experiment in observation which
can more easily be mistaken for reading
from the book of nature testability is
now generally accepted as the defining
characteristic of the scientific method
popper called it the criterion of
demarcation between science and non
science nevertheless testability cannot
have been the decisive factor in the
scientific revolution either contrary to
what has often - contrary to what is
often said test aborted predictions had
always been quite common every
traditional rule of thumb for making a
flint blade or a campfire is testable
every would-be prophet who claims the
Sun will go out next Tuesday as a
testable theory so does every gambler
who has a hunch that this is my lucky
night I can feel it so what is the vital
progress enabling ingredient that is
present in science but absent from the
testable theories of the Prophet and the
gambler
well pausing here sometimes I am left a
little bit speechless I can read this
book a hundred times and and and still
come across things where I almost get
misty-eyed because it is over remarkable
i remarkably dense work where you come
across these things that no one else
previously has said some people may know
I forced at university to read all sorts
of philosophy books that um didn't much
strike me as interesting some were but
what you do find is even when you pick
up a good book let's say Descartes some
meditations I really liked it and five
meditations is only a short bit but this
essentially one or two ideas in there
that are kind of wow that's amazing and
then the rest is fluff
whereas this work here and here's
another example makes this ground
breaking claim that's true and which
still hasn't made itself reach into the
zeitgeist so let me just summarize what
I heard David say there
Papa made the claim and many people seem
to agree that testability is this thing
that demarcates science from non science
and is right
however testable series have always
existed there have always been testable
theories around a caveman who's trying
to make a better Flint blade has a
testable theory when he makes his new
Flint blade if it actually turns out to
be better then he keeps that one and he
refutes the old on if it's not better
then he refutes the new one he keeps the
old one so testability can't be enough
to say what the purpose of science is
there has to be more to science than
this testability has got something to do
with it but it's not the whole story
David is about to go on to explain his
improvement and I don't want to rely on
Authority okay but but those of us who
have been looking into the philosophy of
science for a long time have read people
who have criticized popper or people who
claim to have improved popper we would
readily admit if we can find someone who
has done either of those things but it
is almost never the case
and so when presented with things like
Bayesian ISM we shrug our shoulders
because we realized that popper already
refuted inductive ISM and anyone who
says inductive ISM works or that a
variation on inductive ISM like Bayesian
ISM might be useful for science we've
heard this argument before popper heard
these arguments these arguments have
been going on for decades we've read the
surrounding material and we remain
unconvinced but then when something
about David Deutsch comes along and he's
not actually saying here in the book but
maybe he said it once he's not actually
saying he's improved popper but he does
improve popper he does it right here he
does it explicitly he's about to do it
right now so it's an amazing
accomplishment and so let's just
persevere let's just I'll go into the
next paragraph the reason that
testability is not enough is that
prediction is not and cannot be the
purpose of science consider an audience
watching a conjuring trick the problem
facing them has much the same logic as a
scientific problem although in nature
there is no conjurer trying to deceive
us intentionally we can be mystified in
both cases for essentially the same
reason appearances are not self
explanatory if the explanation of a
conjuring trick were evident in its
appearance there would be no trick if
the explanations of physical phenomena
were evident in their appearance
empiricism would be true and there will
be no need for science as we know it the
problem is not to predict the tricks
appearance I may for instance predict
that if a conjurer seems to place
various balls under various cups those
cups will later appear to be empty and I
may predict that if the conjurer appears
to show it appears to saw someone in
half that person will later appear on
stage I'm harmed those are testable
predictions I may experience mini
conjuring shows and see my predictions
vindicated every time but that does not
even address let alone solve the problem
of how the trick works solving it
requires an explanation a statement of
the reality that accounts for the
appearance okay so now I'm skipping a
lot of chapter 1 the reach of
explanations I encourage people to to
actually go to chapter 1 and read the
whole thing and he speaks about science
and he speaks about progress and how
progress has happened in the past and
now let me go back to the book but even
testable explanatory theories cannot be
the crucial ingredient that made the
difference between no progress in
progress for they to have always been
common consider for example the ancient
Greek myth for explaining the onset of
winter long ago Hades god of the
underworld kidnapped and raped
Persephone goddess of spring then
Persephone's mother Demeter goddess of
the earth and agriculture negotiated a
contract for a daughter's release which
specified that Persephone would marry
Hades and eat a magic seed that will
compel her to visit him once a year
thereafter whenever Persephone was a
wife fulfilling his
gation durmitor became sad and will
command the world become cold and bleak
so that nothing could grow and this is
the wonderful example that David uses in
his TED talk and talks about how because
it didn't need to be Demeter it could
have indeed been some other God it could
have been someone different to
Persephone it didn't need to be a
marriage contract it could have been any
other contract these specific parts of
the theory that explained the seasons on
this Greek myth explanation easy to vary
so let me read a part where where he he
speaks about this in particular so with
minced the reason why those myths are so
easily variable is their details are
barely connected to the details of the
phenomena nothing in the problem of why
winter happens is addressed by
postulating specifically a marriage
contract or a magic seed all the gods
Persephone Hades and Demeter or Freya
whenever a wide range of variant
theories can account equally well for
the phenomena they are trying to explain
there is no reason to prefer one of them
over the others
so advocating a particular one in
preference to the others is irrational
skipping a bit in general when theories
are easily variable in the sense I have
described experimental testing is almost
useless for correcting their errors I
call such theories bad explanations
being proved wrong by experiment and
changing the theories to other bad
explanations does not get their holders
one jot closer to the truth because
explanation plays this central role in
science and because testability is of
little use in the case of bad
explanations I myself prefer to call
myths superstitions and similar theories
unscientific even when they make
testable predictions but it does not
matter what terminology is so long as it
does not lead you to conclude there are
something worthwhile about the
Persephone myth or the prophets
apocalyptic theory or the gamblers
delusion just because it is testable nor
is a person capable of making progress
merely by the virtue of being willing to
drop a theory when it is refuted one
must also be seeking a better
name the relevant phenomena that is the
scientific frame of mind
wonderful so here David is saying that
even if you've got a testable prediction
that doesn't mean that you are entitled
to be referred to as a scientific theory
I think this is a this is a well
expressed way of understanding popper in
a new way more explicitly than perhaps
popper himself it was able to explain
continue as the physicist Richard
Feynman said science is what we have
learned about how to keep from fooling
ourselves by adopting easily variable
explanations the gambling the profit are
insuring the pay will be able to
continue fooling themselves no matter
what happens just as thoroughly as if
they had adopted untestable series they
are insulating themselves from facing
evidence that they are mistaken about
what is really there in the physical
world the quests for good explanations
is I believe the basic regulating
principle not only of science but of the
Enlightenment generally when he says
enlightenment generally he means through
today he's not just talking about that
shortish period that led to the
Industrial Revolution in the past he's
talking about the beginning of the
Enlightenment continuing through to
today so he would say the Enlightenment
is still happening now and I would agree
it is the feature this quest for good
explanations it is the feature that
distinguishes those approaches to
knowledge from all others and it implies
all those other conditions for
scientific progress I have discussed it
trivially implies that prediction alone
is insufficient somewhat less trivially
it leads to the rejection of authority
because if we adopt a theory on
Authority that means that we would also
have accepted a range of different
theories on Authority and hence it also
implies the need for a tradition of
criticism it also implies a
methodological rule a criterion for
reality namely that we should conclude
that a particular thing is real if and
only if it figures in our best
explanation of something this is also
mentioned in the fabric of reality I
think it's
it talks about it as being something
like I'm dr. Johnson's Johnston's
criterion hold on yes sir on the and
there is a section in the fabric of
reality of course about precisely this
chapter for there is called criteria for
reality and the discussion the areas
along the lines of dr. Johnson's
understanding of this phenomena of
things kicking back in reality so if
they kick back
that means they act in autonomous
unpredictable ways in ways that you
can't predict out beforehand so you have
to go out and test things and this can
this doesn't mean only science if you're
investigating anything and it reacts in
a way that you didn't predict then you
know you've got something real okay
now David goes on to write about the
actual explanation of seasons and how
the earth is on a tilt and he says that
is a good explanation hard to vary
because all its details play a
functional role and that is important as
well so a good explanation it's hard to
vary because all of its details play a
functional role in the axis tilt theory
of the earth
you can't tilt the axis by more than
what it is actually tilted because if
you did the seasons would be different
than what they are good expressions are
often strikingly simple or elegant as I
shall discuss in chapter 14 also a
common way in which next relation can be
bad is by containing superfluous
features or arbitrariness and sometimes
removing those yields a good explanation
this has given rise to the misconception
known as Occam's razor named after the
14th century philosopher William William
of Ockham but dating back to antiquity
namely the one should always seek the
simplest explanation one statement of it
is do not multiply assumptions beyond
necessity and I think this is what David
used in the fabric of reality however
there are plenty of very simple
explanations that are nonetheless easy
to vary
such as damn it did it and well
explanations and while assumptions
beyond necessity make a theory bad by
definition there have been many mistaken
ideas of what is necessary in a theory
instrumentalism for extant instance
considers explanation itself unnecessary
and so do many other bad philosophies of
science as I as I shall discuss in
Chapter twelve when a formally good
explanation has been falsified by new
observations it is no longer a good
explanation because the problem has
expanded to include those observations
thus the standard scientific methodology
of dropping theories when refuted by
experiment is implied by the requirement
for good explanations the best
explanations are the ones that are most
constrained by existing knowledge
including other good explanations as
well as other knowledge of the phenomena
to be explained that is why testable
explanations that have passed stringent
tests become extremely good explanations
which is in turn why the maxim of
testability promotes the growth of
knowledge and science conjectures are
the products of creative imagination but
the problem with imagination is that it
can create fiction much more easily than
truth as I have suggested historically
virtually all human attempts to explain
experience in terms of a wider reality
have indeed been fiction in the form of
myths Dogma and mistaken common sense
and the rule of testability is an
insufficient check on such mistakes but
the quest for good explanations does the
job inventing falsehoods is easy and
therefore they are easy to vary once
found discovering good explanations is
hard but the harder they are to find the
harder they are to vary once found the
ideal that explanatory science strives
for is nicely described by the quotation
from wheeler with which I began this
chapter behind it all is surely an idea
so simple so beautiful that when we
grasp it in a decade a century or a
millennium we will all say to each other
how could it have been otherwise now we
shall see how this explanation based
conception of science answers the
question that I asked above how do we
know about such how do we know so much
about unfamiliar aspects of reality
I said again here we have it here we
have the claim that testability is not a
sufficient bulwark against irrationality
but the quests for good explanations is
the quest of good the quest for good
explanations that are good explanations
being hard to vary means that you are
seeking all the time to explain
phenomena that exist things are already
feature and other good explanations of
reality in terms that aren't arbitrary
in terms of things that can't easily be
swapped out for other things you're
looking for this hard to vary quality in
your explanations and when you manage to
get that and testability is one of those
things then then you're on the right
track then you know you're pointed in
the direction of progress okay so
there's a little more here let me read
to the remaining parts that I've
highlighted suppose for the sake of
argument that you thought of the axis
tilt theory yourself it is your
conjecture it is your own original
creation yet because it is a good
explanation hard to vary it is not yours
to modify it has an autonomous meaning
and an autonomous domain of
applicability you cannot confine its
predictions to a region of your choosing
whether you like it or not it makes
predictions about places both known to
you and unknown to you predictions that
you have thought of and ones that you
have not thought of till to plants and
similar orbits in other solar systems
must have seasonal heating and cooling
planets and the most distant galaxies
and plants that we shall never see
because they were destroyed Aeons ago
and also planets that have yet to form
the theory reaches out as it were from
its finite origins inside one brain that
has been affected that has been affected
only by scraps of patchy evidence from a
small part of one hemisphere of one
planet to infinity this reach of
explanations is another meaning of the
beginning of infinity it is the ability
of some of them to solve problems beyond
those that they were created to solve
again here we have another wonderful
piece of philosophy another I would call
it a discovery
this idea that some explanations have
reach infinite reach is profound
it turns knowledge into a force of
nature it is the thing that can point
itself anywhere in reality and transform
that if it's so if there are people
there that want to do that and have the
knowledge of how to do so so I'll say
that again
knowledge is an entity in the universe
but if it points itself at somewhere in
reality it can transform that reality
into something completely different as
long as there are people there who
choose to do so and have that knowledge
so the knowledge of how to completely
transform the andromeda galaxy if it's
discovered here on earth it is the thing
that will transform the andromeda galaxy
which means that knowledge is kind of
like a supermassive black hole if
there's a supermassive black hole
wandering through the universe that we
haven't yet seen yet or that we probably
would have because of such things as
gravitational lensing but let's say it's
wandering through the universe and no
one's noticed it yet
and it's heading towards the Andromeda
galaxy then if it passes through the
Andromeda galaxy it could really upset
the undramatic galaxy it could put the
all bits of the stars it could change
the shape of the andromeda galaxy it can
do that no one has a problem
understanding that this idea that black
holes hugely powerful bodies can eat
stars they could transform a galaxy but
so can knowledge knowledge can do what
huge structures in physics can do they
can transform things we've already done
it on a very small scale if you want to
explain why it is that a city looks the
way it does there's no point consulting
the geology well ok there is that
geology has something to do with the way
our city looks but what also has
something to do with the way aesthetics
is the knowledge of the people that are
there so knowledge is like a force of
nature
it's like erosion if you like
it's this thing that can pass over
physical structures and change them let
me continue the axis tilt theory is an
example it was originally proposed to
explain the changes in the sun's angle
of elevation during each year combined
with the little knowledge of heat and
spinning bodies then explained seasons
and without any further modification
that it also explained why seasons are
out of phase and the two hemispheres and
what tropical regions do not have them
and while the summer Sun shines at
midnight in polar regions three
phenomena of which it's creatives may
well have been unaware the reach of
explanations is not a principle of
induction it is not something that the
creator of the explanation can use to
obtain or justify it it is not just part
of the it is not part of the creative
process at all we find out about it only
after we have the explanation sometimes
long after so it has nothing to do with
extrapolation or induction or with
deriving a theory in any other alleged
way it is exactly the other way around
the reason that the explanation of
seasons reaches far outside the
experience of its creators is precisely
because it does not have to be
extrapolated by its nature as an
explanation when its creators first
thought of it it already applied in our
planets other Hemisphere and throughout
the solar system and in other solar
systems and at other times thus the
reach of an explanation is neither an
additional assumption nor a detachable
one it is determined by the content of
the explanation itself the better an
explanation is the more rigidly its
reach is determined because the harder
it is to vary an explanation the harder
it is in particular to construct a
variant with a different reach with a
larger or smaller that is still an
explanation I'm going to skip over a
little more now it also makes sense to
speak of the reach of non explanatory
forms of knowledge rules of thumb and
also knowledge that is implicit in the
genes for Biological adaptations so as I
said my rule of thumb about cups and
balls tricks has reached to a certain
class of tricks but I could not know
what that class is without further
explanation for why the rule works and
I'll stop down on Chapter 1
this idea about the reach of
explanations is is another phenomenal
piece of philosophy I think it's up
there with this idea that what science
is about is not merely testable theories
because they've been common forever
instead it's about hard to very
explanations of the physical world I
would say that's my interpretation but
David makes the the broader point that
what were actually after in the
production of knowledge generally so
whether it's philosophy or history or
mathematics science any particular
domain what we're after is hard to vary
explanations and the reason that we have
been making progress since the
Enlightenment through today's
enlightenment is because of a culture of
criticism the culture of criticism where
we criticize our best theories that
exist at the moment and we improve them
and then Able's progress we're only in
chapter one and already there are these
phenomenal advances in philosophy
phenomenal advances in epistemology
excellent explanations of what our best
explanations of epistemology and
philosophy are all illustrated with some
excellent science that'll do me for now
that's um that's quite a bit of reading
and maybe tomorrow I'll try and get into
chapter 2 we'll see how we go see